A corpus is a remarkable thing, not so much because it is a collection of language text, but because of the properties that it acquires if it is well-designed and carefully-constructed.

The guiding principles that relate corpus and text are concepts that are not strictly definable, but rely heavily on the good sense and clear thinking of the people involved, and feedback from a consensus of users. However unsteady is the notion of representativeness, it is an unavoidable one in corpus design, and others such as sample and balance need to be faced as well. It is probably time for linguists to be less squeamish about matters which most scientists take completely for granted.

I propose to defer offering a definition of a corpus until after these issues have been aired, so that the definition, when it comes, rests on as stable foundations as possible. For this reason, the definition of a corpus will come at the end of this paper, rather than at the beginning.

Experts in corpus analysis are not necessarily good at building the corpora they analyse — in fact there is a danger of a vicious circle arising if they construct a corpus to reflect what they already know or can guess about its linguistic detail. Ideally a corpus should be designed and built by an expert in the communicative patterns of the communities who use the language that the corpus will mirror. Quite regardless of what is inside the documents and speech events, they should be selected as the sorts of documents that people are writing and reading, and the sorts of conversations they are having. Factual evidence such as audience size or circulation size can refine such sampling. The corpus analyst then accepts whatever is selected.

Obviously if it is already known that certain text types contain large numbers of a microlinguistic feature such as proper nouns or passive verb phrases, it becomes a futile activity to "discover" this by assembling a corpus of such texts.

Selection criteria that are derived from an examination of the communicative function of a text are called external criteria, and those that reflect details of the language of the text are called internal criteria. Corpora should be designed and constructed exclusively on external criteria.

A corpus is made for the study of language; other collections of language are made for other purposes. So a well-designed corpus will reflect this purpose. The contents of the corpus should be chosen to support the purpose, and therefore in some sense represent the language from which they are chosen.

Since electronic corpora became possible, linguists have been overburdened by truisms about the relation between a corpus and a language, arguments which are as irrelevant as they are undeniably correct. Everyone seems to accept that no limits can be placed on a natural language, as to the size of its vocabulary, the range of its meaningful structures, the variety of its realisations and the evolutionary processes within it and outside it that cause it to develop continuously. Therefore no corpus, no matter how large, how carefully designed, can have exactly the same characteristics as the language itself.

Fine. So we sample, like all the other scholars who study unlimitable phenomena. We remain, as they do, aware that the corpus may not capture all the patterns of the language, nor represent them in precisely the correct proportions. In fact there are no such things as "correct proportions" of components of an unlimited population.

However hard we strive, a corpus will occasionally show features which we suspect not to be characteristic of the language under study, or fail to show features which are expected. Following our first principle above, we should not feel under pressure to use the patterns of the language to influence the design of the corpus, but we should review the design criteria to check that they are adequate.

To optimise the application of this principle we can make use of an important resource within ourselves, which is not available to most scientific researchers in other disciplines. As sophisticated users of at least one language, we have an inbuilt awareness of language structure, often called intuition, that gives a personal, independent and non-negotiable assessment of language pattern. Intuition can help in many ways in language research, in conjunction with other criteria of a more examinable nature. The drawbacks to intuition are (a) that we cannot justify its use beyond personal testimony, and (b) that people differ notoriously in their intuitive judgements. In this context we should also be aware that an incautious use of intuition in the selection of texts for a corpus would undermine the first principle.

That is to say, the existence of components differentiated according to the criteria discussed below, or identified by archival information, does not confer representative status on them, and so it is unsafe to use them in contrast with other components. Now that with many corpus management systems it is possible to "dial-a-corpus" to your own requirements, it is important to note that the burden of demonstrating representativeness lies with the user of such selections and not with the original corpus builder. It is perfectly possible, and indeed very likely, that a corpus component can be adequate for representing its variety within a large normative corpus, but inadequate to represent its variety when freestanding.

Often some of these large-scale criteria are pre-determined by constraints on the corpus design — for example a corpus called MICASE stands for the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English, and the corpus consists of speech events recorded on the Ann Arbor campus of the University of Michigan on either side of the millennium; it follows that the language in the corpus will mainly be of the large variety called American English. All the above criteria are pre-determined, and all but the date are built into the name of this corpus, so its own structural criteria will be set at a more detailed level3.

All but the most comprehensive corpora are likely to use one or more criteria which are specific to the kind of language that is being gathered, and it is not possible to anticipate what these are going to be. The corpus designer should choose criteria that are easy to establish, to avoid a lot of labour at the selection stage, and they should be of a fairly simple kind, so that the margin of error is likely to be small. If they are difficult to establish, complex or overlapping they should be rejected, because errors in classification can invalidate even large research projects and important findings.

Now that there are a number of corpora of all kinds available, it is helpful to look at the criteria that have been used, and to evaluate them in three ways — as themselves, how useful and valuable a variety of the language they depict; as a set of criteria, how they interact with each other and avoid ambiguity and overlap; and the results that they give when applied to the corpus.

Beyond these criteria it is possible to envisage an unlimited categorisation of people, places and events, any of which are potentially valuable for one study or another (see the typology mentioned above). The gender of the originator of a text has been a popular criterion in recent years, though few texts have a single originator whose gender is known, and hoaxes are not unknown (for example it was recently alleged that the works of a famous crime writer noted for rough-and-tough stories were in fact composed by his wife). It is essential in practice to distinguish structural criteria from useful information about a text.

For a corpus to be trusted, the structural criteria must be chosen with care, because the concerns of balance and representativeness depend on these choices. Other information about a text can, of course, be stored for future reference, and scholars can make up their own collections of texts to suit the objectives of their study. The question arises as to how and where this information should be stored, and how it should be made available. Because it is quite commonly added to the texts themselves, it is an issue of good practice, especially since in some cases the additions can be much larger than the original texts.

In the early days of archiving text material, the limitations of the computers and their software required a structurally simple model; also before there was an abundance of language in electronic form, and before the internet made it possible for corpora to be accessed remotely, it was necessary to agree protocols and practices so that data could be made available to the research community. The model that gained widest acceptance was one where additional material was interspersed in the running text, but enclosed in diamond brackets so that it could — at least in theory — be found quickly, and ignored if the text was required without the additions.

Nowadays there is no need to maintain a single data stream; modern computers have no difficulty storing the plain text without any additions, and relating it token by token to any other information set that is available, whether "mark-up", which is information about the provenance, typography and layout of a printed document, or "annotation", which is analytic information usually about the language. It is also possible nowadays to store facsimiles of documents and digitised recordings of speech, and have the computer link these, item by item, to plain text, thus removing even the need to have mark-up at all.

Looking down from the totality of the corpus, the major criteria will define several components, while at the other end are the individual texts, which will be such things as written or printed documents, and transcripts of spoken events. Cells are the groupings formed from the intersection of criteria.

The first-level components will be small in number, for practical reasons, because if there are too many then either each component will be very small or the corpus will be very large. The simplest classification is binary, so that if a corpus of spoken language is first divided into "private" and "public", then each of these types will have to be represented by a sufficiently large amount of text for its characteristics to become evident. If the next criterion is "three or fewer active participants", as against "more than three active participants", then each of the original categories is divided into two, and the theoretical size of the corpus doubles.

Each criterion divides the corpus into smaller cells; if we assume that the criteria are binary and cross-cutting then (as we have just seen) two criteria divide the corpus into four cells, three into eight, four into sixteen etc. You then have to decide what is the acceptable minimum number of words in a cell; this depends quite a lot on the type of study you are setting out to do, but if it is not substantial then it will not supply enough reliable evidence as part of the overall picture that the corpus gives of the language. This is known as the "scarce data problem". The matter of size is discussed later, and the example in the following paragraph is only illustrative.

If you decide on, say, a million words as the minimum for a cell, then with four criteria you need a corpus with a minimum size of sixteen million words. Each additional binary criterion doubles the minimum size of the corpus, and in addition we find that real life is rarely as tidy as this model suggests; a corpus where the smallest cell contains a million words is likely in practice to have several cells which contain much more. This involves the question of balance, to which we will return. There are also questions of criteria that have more than two options, and of what to do with empty or underfilled cells, all of which complicate the picture.

The matter of balance returns as we approach the smallest item in a corpus, the text. Here arises another issue in sampling that affects, and is affected by, the overall size of the corpus. Language artefacts differ enormously in size, from a few words to millions, and ideally, documents and transcripts of verbal encounters should be included in their entirety. The problem is that long texts in a small corpus could exert an undue influence on the results of queries, and yet it is not good practice to select only part of a complete artefact. However it is an unsafe assumption that any part of a document or conversation is representative of the whole — the result of research for decades of discourse and text analysis make it plain that position in a communicative event affects the local choices.

The best answer to this dilemma is to build a large enough corpus to dilute even the longest texts in it. If this is not practical, and there is a risk that a single long text would have too great an influence on the whole, so recourse has to be made to selecting only a part of it, and this has to be done on "best guess" grounds. But even a very large corpus may find it almost impossible to get round copyright problems if the builders insist on only complete texts. The rights holders of a valuable document may not agree to donate the full text to a corpus, but if it is agreed that occasional passages are omitted, so that the value of the document is seriously diminished, then the rights holders might be persuaded to relent.

These are the issues in text selection, and one point in particular should be made clearly. There is no virtue from a linguistic point of view in selecting samples all of the same size. True, this was the convention in some of the early corpora, and it has been perpetuated in later corpora with a view to simplifying aspects of contrastive research. Apart from this very specialised consideration, it is difficult to justify the continuation of the practice. The integrity and representativeness of complete artefacts is far more important than the difficulty of reconciling texts of different dimensions.

It is now possible to approach the notion of representativeness, and to discuss this concept we return to the first principle, and consider the users of the language we wish to represent. What sort of documents do they write and read, and what sort of spoken encounters do they have? How can we allow for the relative popularity of some publications over others, and the difference in attention given to different publications? How do we allow for the unavoidable influence of practicalities such as the relative ease of acquiring public printed language, e-mails and web pages as compared with the labour and expense of recording and transcribing private conversations or acquiring and keying personal handwritten correspondence? How do we identify the instances of language that are influential as models for the population, and therefore might be weighted more heavily than the rest?

The previous paragraph is a set of questions to which there are no definite answers, and yet on which the whole character of the corpus will rest. According to claims, the most likely document that an ordinary English citizen will cast his or her eye over is The Sun newspaper; in a corpus of British English should we then include more texts from that paper than from any other source? If this argument is rejected on stylistic grounds — perhaps that the language of The Sun is particularly suited to the dramatic presentation of popular news and views and would not be recommended as a general model for written work — then the corpus builder is adopting a prescriptive stance and is risking the vicious circle that could so easily arise, of a corpus constructed in the image of the builder.

A corpus that sets out to represent a language or a variety of a language cannot predict what queries will be made of it, so users must be able to refer to its make-up in order to interpret results accurately. In everything to do with criteria, this point about documentation is crucial. So many of our decisions are subjective that it is essential that a user can inspect not only the contents of a corpus but the reasons that the contents are as they are. Sociolinguistics is extremely fashion-conscious, and arguments that are acceptable criteria during one decade may look very old-fashioned in the next.

Also at any time a researcher may get strange results, counter-intuitive and conflicting with established descriptions. Neither of these factors proves that there is something wrong with the corpus, because corpora are full of surprises, but they do cast doubt on the interpretation of the findings, and one of the researcher's first moves on encountering unexpected results will be to check that there is not something in the corpus architecture or the selection of texts that might account for it.

The notion of balance is even more vague than representativeness, but the word is frequently used, and clearly for many people it is meaningful and useful. Roughly, for a corpus to be pronounced balanced, the proportions of different kinds of text it contains should correspond with informed and intuitive judgements.

Most general corpora of today are badly balanced because they do not have nearly enough spoken language in them; estimates of the optimal proportion of spoken language range from 50% — the neutral option — to 90%, following a guess that most people experience many times as much speech as writing. Another factor that affects balance is the degree of specialisation of the text, because a specialised text in a general corpus can give the impression of imbalance.

This is a problem in the area of popular magazines in English, because there are a large number of them and most use a highly specialised language that non-devotees just do not understand. So as a text type it is a very important one, but it is almost impossible to select a few texts which can claim to be representative. How are magazines for fly fishermen, personal computers and popular music going to represent the whole variety of popular magazines (as is the case in The Bank of English)?

It was mentioned above that not all cells need to be filled; for example the written component of a corpus may subdivide into newspapers, magazines, books etc., for which there are no exact equivalents in the spoken language, which might divide into broadcasts, speaker-led events, organised meetings and conversations. The idea of maintaining a balance prompts the corpus builder to try to align these categories, however roughly, so that there is not too much very formal or very informal language in the corpus as a whole. If — as is frequently reported — many users value informal and impromptu language as revealing most clearly how meaning is made, a deliberate imbalance may be created by selection in favour of this variety, and this should be documented so that users are aware of the bias that has been knowingly introduced into the corpus.

Specialised corpora are constructed after some initial selectional criteria have been applied, for example the MICASE corpus cited above. More delicate criteria are used to partition them, but the issues of balance and representativeness remain cogent and central in the design.

The point above concerning a text type where most of the exemplars are highly specialised, raises the matter of topic, which most corpus builders have a strong urge to control. Many corpus projects are so determined about this that they conduct a semantic analysis of the language on abstract principles like those of Dewey or Roget, and then search for texts that match their framework. Three problems doom this kind of enterprise to failure. One is that the corpus will not conform to the classification, the second (also faced by library cataloguers) is that no two people agree on any such analysis, and the third is that topic classification turns out to be much more sociolinguistic than semantic, and therefore dependent on the culture and not on the meanings of the words. This last point emerges strongly when we try to make corpora in more than one language but sharing the same topic classification.

As well as these practical points, our first principle rules out topic as a source of corpus criteria. The most obvious manifestation of topic is certainly found in the vocabulary, and the notion of vocabulary as a defining characteristic of a corpus is strong; hence it seems strange to many people that it is essential that the vocabulary should not be directly controlled. But vocabulary choice is clearly an internal criterion.

There are external correlates, and these will indirectly control the vocabulary of the selected texts. For example many social institutions, like professional bodies and educational establishments, do show the kind of vocabulary consistency at times that we associate with topic, and they can be used as external criteria, but topic is most definitely a matter of language patterns, mainly of vocabulary selection and discourse focusing.

So some additional leeway will have to be built in to cope with such contingencies. If the objects of study are lemmas rather than word forms, the picture is not very different. The minimum number of instances needed for a rough outline of usage will rise to an average of about fifty for English (but many more for highly inflected languages).

If the research is about events which are more complicated than just word occurrence, then the estimate of a suitable corpus size will also get more complicated. For example if the research is about multi-word phrases, it must be remembered that the occurrence of two or more words together is inherently far rarer than either on its own. So if each of the two words in a minimal phrase occur 20 times in a million word corpus, for 20 instances of the two together the arithmetic suggests a corpus of approximately 5 billion words will be needed. For three words together of this frequency the size of the corpus could be beyond our imaginings.

However, words do not occur according to the laws of chance, and if the phrases chosen are normal ones in the language, they will occur many times more often than the arithmetic projection above; so a much smaller corpus is likely to contain sufficient instances. To estimate roughly the size of a corpus for retrieval of a combination of two objects, first estimate the size you will need for the less common object on its own and then raise that figure by an order of magnitude. If there are 20 instances per million words for each of two words in a phrase, then twenty million words is likely to provide 20 instances of the pair (rather than the 5 billion projected by the arithmetic); if there are three of this frequency than 200 million words will probably be enough.

These are the kinds of figures that you will need to use in estimates of your optimal corpus size. Now we must build in the considerations of the methodology that you intend to use, because this can have a dramatic effect on the size.

The density of the patterns of collocation is one of the determinants of the optimal size of a corpus. Other factors include the range of ambiguity of a word chosen, and sometimes its distribution among the corpus components.

If you intend to continue examining the first results using the computer, you will probably need several hundred instances of the simplest objects, so that the programs can penetrate below the surface variation and isolate the generalities. The more you can gather, the clearer and more accurate will be the picture that you get of the language.